(Criterion A) that is attributable to another medical condition (Criterion B). In most cases the
(brief reactive psychosis): If symptoms occur in
(e.g., E05.90 hyperthyroidism; F06.33 bipolar disorder due to hyperthyroidism, with
(e.g., a deficit in language skills or a deficit in number processing). These comorbidities do not
(e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition (e.g.,
(e.g., cocaine) or another medical condition (e.g., Huntington’s disease, postviral
(i.e., spoken, written, sign language, or other) due to deficits in comprehension
(i.e., within 1 month); however, there are exceptions, especially in chronic medical conditions
(major depressive or manic) concurrent with Criterion A of schizophrenia.
(or more) of the following symptoms have persisted (four if the mood is only
(see pp. 169–170)
. The equivalent term
111-256 (Rosa’s Law) changed all references to “mental retardation” in federal laws
A diagnosis of stereotypic movement disorder is not
A distinct period of abnormally and persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable
A large number of substances of abuse, some prescribed medications, and several medical
A persistent pattern of inattention and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity that interferes
A prominent and persistent disturbance in mood that predominates in the clinical
A tic is a sudden, rapid, recurrent, nonrhythmic motor movement or
A wide variety of mental disorders and medical
Adult-onset dysfluencies.
Agitation, not influenced by external stimuli.
An episode of factitious disorder with predominantly
An episode of the disorder lasts at least 1 month but less than 6 months. When
An uninterrupted period of illness during which there is a major mood episode
Anxiety Disorders
Apart from the impact of the delusion(s) or its ramifications, functioning is not
Approximately 14% of individuals with bipolar II disorder have at least one lifetime eating
Assessing psychosis through interpreters or in a second or third language must avoid the
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
Audible or silent blocking (filled or unfilled pauses in speech).
Autism Spectrum Disorder
Autism spectrum disorder frequently manifests with delayed language
Autism spectrum disorder.
Bilingualism.
Bipolar I Disorder
Bipolar II Disorder
Bipolar II disorder, requiring the lifetime experience of at least one major depressive episode
Bipolar and Related Disorder Due to Another Medical
Bipolar and Related Disorders
Bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition would not be diagnosed when the
Bipolar and related disorders
Both multiple motor and one or more vocal tics have been present at
Brief Psychotic Disorder
Brief psychotic disorder.
Broken words (e.g., pauses within a word).
Catalepsy (i.e., passive induction of a posture held against gravity).
Catatonic Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition
Cautionary Statement for Forensic Use of DSM-5
Childhood-Onset Fluency Disorder (Stuttering)
Childhood-onset fluency disorder can co-occur with other disorders, such as attention-
Children who have dysfluencies when they
Circumlocutions (word substitutions to avoid problematic words).
Co-occurring mental disorders are the norm in bipolar I disorder, with the majority of individuals
Code based on predominant symptom:
Coding note:
Common comorbidities in children with chronic motor stereotypies include attention-deficit
Communication
Communication Disorders
Comorbidity
Comorbidity with anxiety disorders is increasingly recognized in schizophrenia. Rates of
Compared with typically developing
Conceptual domain
Criteria and text for schizotypal personality disorder can be found in the chapter “Personality
Criteria for a major depressive, manic, or hypomanic episode have never been
Criterion A for schizophrenia has never been met.
Criterion A.
Criterion D for a manic episode or except Criterion F for a hypomanic episode.
Cultural Considerations in the Assessment of Psychotic Symptoms
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Cyclothymic Disorder
DSM-5 Basics
DSM-5 Task Force and Work Groups
DSM-5-TR Chairs and Review Groups
DSM-5-TR Classification
Declines in critical social and communication behaviors during the first 2 years of life are
Decreased need for sleep (e.g., feels rested after only 3 hours of sleep).
Deficits in adaptive functioning that result in failure to meet developmental and
Deficits in intellectual functions, such as reasoning, problem solving, planning,
Deficits in social-emotional reciprocity, ranging, for example, from abnormal
Delusional Disorder
Delusional disorder can be diagnosed only if the total duration of all mood episodes remains
Depressive Disorders
Depressive and bipolar disorders and schizoaffective disorder.
Developmental Coordination Disorder
Diagnosis of psychotic disorder due to another medical condition can be
Diagnostic Features
Diagnostic accuracy and the quality of treatment planning may be enhanced by interview
Differential Diagnosis
Difficulties learning and using academic skills, as indicated by the presence of at
Difficulties mastering number sense, number facts, or calculation (e.g., has
Difficulties with spelling (e.g., may add, omit, or substitute vowels or
Difficulties with written expression (e.g., makes multiple grammatical or
Difficulty understanding the meaning of what is read (e.g., may read text
Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition”). Catatonia can also be a side effect of a
Disorders of
Disorders of communication include deficits in language, speech, and communication.
Disorders that commonly co-occur with developmental coordination disorder include
Disorders.” Because this disorder is considered part of the schizophrenia spectrum of disorders,
Disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or incoherence).
Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct Disorders
Dissociative Disorders
Disturbances in the normal fluency and time patterning of speech that are
Do not include a symptom if it is a culturally sanctioned response.
Duration of an episode of the disturbance is at least 1 day but less than 1 month,
During the above 2-year period (1 year in children and adolescents), Criterion A
During the period of mood disturbance and increased energy and activity, three
Dysfluencies of speech may be associated with a hearing impairment or other
Dysfluency is often absent during oral reading, singing, or talking to inanimate objects or to pets.
Echolalia (i.e., mimicking another’s speech).
Echopraxia (i.e., mimicking another’s movements).
Effects of Medication”). Because of the seriousness of the complications, particular attention
Elimination Disorders
Erotomanic type:
F06.0 With hallucinations:
F06.2 With delusions:
F06.33 With manic features:
F06.33 With manic- or hypomanic-like episode:
F06.34 With mixed features:
F71 Moderate
F73 Profound
Feeding and Eating Disorders
Flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are racing.
For a diagnosis of bipolar II disorder, it is necessary to meet the following criteria for
For a significant portion of the time since the onset of the disturbance, level of
For at least 2 years (at least 1 year in children and adolescents) there have been
For example, countries with cultural prohibitions against alcohol or other substance use may
For preschool children, there may be
Full criteria are met except
Full criteria are not met for a manic or hypomanic
Functional (conversion) stereotypies.
Gender Dysphoria
Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior.
Hallucinations, if present, are not prominent and are related to the
Hallucinations.
Hearing impairment needs to be excluded as the primary
Hearing or other sensory impairment.
Hypomanic Episode
If delusions are the predominant symptom.
If hallucinations are the predominant symptom.
If manic or major depressive episodes have occurred, these have been brief
If onset is during pregnancy or within 4 weeks
If onset of dysfluencies is during or after adolescence, it is an “adult-
If symptoms do not occur in response to events
If the psychotic symptoms persist for 1 month or longer, the diagnosis
Impairments in discourse (ability to use vocabulary and connect sentences to
In addition to the symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria, the assessment of
In certain individuals with personality disorders, psychosocial stressors
Inaccurate or slow and effortful word reading (e.g., reads single words aloud
Inattention:
Include the name of the other medical condition in the name of the
Individuals with ADHD may fall, bump into objects, or
Individuals with autism spectrum disorder may be uninterested in
Individuals with bipolar I disorder also have high rates of serious co-occurring and often
Individuals with bipolar II disorder also have comorbid medical conditions, which have the
Individuals with substance/medication-induced
Individuals with syndromes causing hyperextensible joints (found
Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity.
Intellectual Development
Intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability) and global developmental delay.
Intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability) is a disorder with onset
Intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability).
Introduction
It is necessary to distinguish between dysfluencies resulting from attempts to learn
Joint hypermobility syndrome.
Language Disorder
Language disorder can be acquired in association with neurological
Language disorder may be associated with other neurodevelopmental disorders in terms of
Language impairment is often the
Language regression.
Later-onset
Life expectancy is reduced in individuals with schizophrenia because of associated medical
Limited sentence structure (ability to put words and word endings together to
Loss of speech and language in a child at any age warrants thorough
Malingering and factitious disorders.
Mannerism (i.e., odd, circumstantial caricature of normal actions).
Many individuals diagnosed with schizoaffective disorder are also diagnosed with other mental
Medication side effects.
Medication-Induced Movement Disorders and Other Adverse Effects of Medication
Monosyllabic whole-word repetitions (e.g., “I-I-I-I see him”).
More talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking.
Motor Disorders
Mutism (i.e., no, or very little, verbal response [
Negative symptoms (i.e., diminished emotional expression or avolition).
Negativism (i.e., opposition or no response to instructions or external stimuli).
Neurocognitive Disorders
Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Neurological disorders.
Normal speech dysfluencies.
Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders
Often avoids, dislikes, or is reluctant to engage in tasks that require
Often does not follow through on instructions and fails to finish
Often does not seem to listen when spoken to directly (e.g., mind seems
Often fails to give close attention to details or makes careless mistakes in
Often has difficulty organizing tasks and activities (e.g., difficulty managing
Often has difficulty sustaining attention in tasks or play activities (e.g., has
Often loses things necessary for tasks or activities (e.g., school materials,
Onset is before age 18 years.
Onset is in the early developmental period.
Onset of intellectual and adaptive deficits during the developmental period.
Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention
Other Mental Disorders and Additional Codes
Other mental disorders and medical conditions.
Other mental disorders associated with a psychotic episode.
Other psychotic disorders.
Paraphilic Disorders
Persistent (Chronic) Motor or Vocal Tic Disorder
Persistent deficits in social communication and social interaction across multiple
Persistent difficulties in the acquisition and use of language across modalities
Persistent difficulties in the social use of verbal and nonverbal communication as
Personality Disorders
Personality disorders.
Posturing (i.e., spontaneous and active maintenance of a posture against
Practical domain
Preface to DSM-5
Preface to DSM-5-TR
Premenstrual syndrome and premenstrual dysphoric disorder are common in women with
Presence of one (or more) of the following symptoms. At least one of these must
Presence of one or both of the following symptoms:
Prominent hallucinations or delusions.
Psychosis Symptom Severity in the chapter “Assessment Measures.”)
Psychotic Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition
Psychotic disorders.
Rates of comorbidity with substance-related disorders are high in schizophrenia. Over half of
Reduced vocabulary (word knowledge and use).
Repetitive, seemingly driven, and apparently purposeless motor behavior (e.g.,
Schizoaffective Disorder
Schizoaffective disorder and depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic
Schizophrenia
Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
Schizophreniform Disorder
Schizophreniform disorder differs in duration from brief psychotic
Schizotypal (Personality) Disorder
Sensory deficits.
Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of
Severity levels for intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual
Sexual Dysfunctions
Since the diagnostic criteria for schizophreniform disorder and schizophrenia differ primarily
Single or multiple motor or vocal tics have been present during the
Six (or more) of the following symptoms have persisted for at
Sleep-Wake Disorders
Social (Pragmatic) Communication Disorder
Social anxiety disorder.
Social domain
Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders
Sound and syllable repetitions.
Sound prolongations of consonants as well as vowels.
Specific Learning Disorder
Specific learning disorder is distinguished from the cognitive-processing
Specific learning disorder, with impairment in reading.
Speech Sound Disorder
Stereotyped movements must be distinguished from
Stereotypic Movement Disorder
Stereotypy (i.e., repetitive, abnormally frequent, non-goal-directed
Stupor (i.e., no psychomotor activity; not actively relating to environment).
Stuttering may occur as a side effect of medication and may be detected
Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Substance-induced repetitive behaviors.
Substance-related disorders and sleep disorders (i.e., difficulties in initiating and maintaining
Substance/Medication-Induced Bipolar and Related
Substance/Medication-Induced Psychotic Disorder
Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder.
Symptoms of depression are also present but do
The ICD-10-CM code depends on the specifier (see below).
The acquisition and execution of coordinated motor skills is substantially below
The association between catatonia and mood disorders has been found in a wide range of cultural
The bipolar I disorder criteria represent the modern understanding of the classic manic-
The clinical picture is dominated by three (or more) of the following symptoms:
The diagnosis of cyclothymic disorder is given to adults who experience at least 2 years (for
The diagnosis of schizophrenia is made
The different types of specific learning disorder commonly co-occur with one another (e.g.,
The disorder must be distinguished from normal dysfluencies that
The disturbance causes anxiety about speaking or limitations in effective
The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
The disturbance is not attributable to a speech-motor or sensory deficit,
The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or
The disturbance is not better explained by a bipolar or related disorder that is not
The disturbance is not better explained by a psychotic disorder that is not
The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder.
The disturbance is not better explained by major depressive or bipolar disorder
The essential feature of childhood-onset fluency disorder (stuttering) is a disturbance in the
The essential feature of cyclothymic disorder is a chronic, fluctuating mood disturbance
The essential features of bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition are
The individual may function age-
The involved substance/medication is capable of producing the symptoms in
The major depressive episode must include Criterion A1: Depressed
The onset of symptoms is in the early developmental period. (
The presence of one (or more) delusions with a duration of 1 month or longer.
The recognition that there are individuals who experience bipolar-like phenomena with
The repetitive motor behavior interferes with social, academic, or other activities
The repetitive motor behavior is not attributable to the physiological effects of a
The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
The symptoms are not solely a manifestation of oppositional behavior,
The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
The symptoms in Criterion A are not better explained by schizoaffective disorder,
The symptoms in Criterion A developed during or soon after substance
The symptoms of social (pragmatic) communication disorder overlap with
The symptoms precede the onset of the substance/medication use; the
The symptoms preceded the onset of the substance/medication use; the
The tics may wax and wane in frequency but have persisted for more than 1 year
There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings
These disorders may be distinguished
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of attention-
This diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance
This subtype applies when the central theme of the delusion
Tic Disorders
Tourette’s Disorder
Tourette’s disorder.
Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders
Two (or more) of the following, each present for a significant portion of time
Unspecified Communication Disorder
Use of the Manual
Vocal tics and repetitive vocalizations of Tourette’s disorder should be
Waxy flexibility (i.e., slight, even resistance to positioning by examiner).
With anxious distress
With marked stressor(s)
With peripartum onset:
Without marked stressor(s):
Without ongoing support, the adaptive deficits limit functioning in one or more
Words produced with an excess of physical tension.
a current or past hypomanic episode
a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition.
a new language and dysfluencies that indicate a fluency disorder, which typically appear in both
abilities must take into account the individual's cultural and language context, particularly for
ability, and a discrepancy between verbal and nonverbal ability is not necessary for a diagnosis
absence of substance use.
abstract thinking, judgment, academic learning, and learning from experience,
abuse. In such cases, the diagnosis substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and
accurately but not understand the sequence, relationships, inferences, or
activities of daily life, such as communication, social participation, and
activities:
actual reading ability of children who stutter.
additional diagnosis of brief psychotic disorder may be appropriate.
adolescents and adults (age 17 and older), at least five symptoms are
adolescents and adults, preparing reports, completing forms, reviewing
almost anyone in similar circumstances in the individual’s culture.
alphabet but not responding to own name), and rigid adherence to routines and repetitive
among individuals with bipolar disorder than in the general population. Comorbid
an established aphasia]).
and ADHD is more frequent than expected by chance. If criteria for both disorders are met, both
and abnormally increased activity or energy.
and at least one hypomanic episode (but no history of mania), is no longer thought to be a less
and community.
and is labeled in this section of ICD-10 as schizotypal disorder, it is listed in this chapter and
and may result in self-injury.
and monosyllabic whole-word repetitions (e.g., “I-I-I-I see him”). The disturbance in fluency
and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may be rated for its current
and timing.
another medical condition and is not better explained by another mental
approaches, scales, and tools that have been adapted or validated for the person’s culture and by
appropriate for repetitive skin picking or scratching associated with amphetamine intoxication or
appropriate norms for a different group). The diagnostic category of communication disorders
appropriately but are not utilized because of anxiety, fear, or distress about social interactions.
approximately 9% of patients had catatonia. Before the catatonia specifier is used in
are characterized by frequent and marked occurrences of one (or more) of the
are found between the chapters on schizophrenia
are illustrative, not exhaustive; see text):
as “provisional.”
ascribing impairment to motor skills.
assessment to determine if there is a specific neurological condition, such as Landau-Kleffner
associated with specific neurological insults and a variety of medical conditions and mental
audible or silent blocking (i.e., filled or unfilled pauses in speech), circumlocutions (i.e., word
autism spectrum disorder assessment.
autoimmune diseases, obstructive sleep apnea, metabolic syndrome, and migraine more common
available information to make a judgment. Further research on these assessments is necessary to
be (1), (2), or (3):
be rare (1.3%). A positive family history of speech or language disorders is often present.
been without the symptoms for more than 2 months at a time.
behavior (whether intentional or unintentional) that has the potential to influence the behavior,
behaviors (e.g., flapping, spinning, echolalia).
bipolar I disorder), the influence of borderline personality features on vulnerability to bipolar I
bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition, other specified bipolar and related
bipolar disorder, especially in those with bipolar II disorder. Among women who have
bipolar disorder. Comorbidities appear in multiple organ systems, with cardiovascular and
borderline personality disorder.
both disorders are met, both diagnoses can be given.
brief relative to the total duration of the delusional disturbance. If not, then a diagnosis of other
bumping into
but the substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder can usually be distinguished by the
but these would have a temporal relationship to the onset of cognitive changes consistent with
by a temporal relationship with exposure to the medication.
by other types of speech dysfluencies, including broken words (e.g., pauses within a word),
cases are diagnosed as F98.5 adult-onset fluency disorder.)
catatonia, and is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g.,
catching an object, using scissors or cutlery, handwriting, riding a bike, or
cause of language difficulties. Language deficits may be associated with a hearing impairment,
childhood with disorganized speech; attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; obsessive-
children, a full year) of both hypomanic and depressive periods without ever fulfilling the criteria
chronological relationship of substance use to the onset and remission of the psychosis in the
circumstances in the individual’s culture.
classic description only to the extent that neither psychosis nor the lifetime experience of a major
clinical attention.
cognition, depression, and mania symptom domains is vital for making critically important
communication deficits are clearly in excess of the intellectual limitations.
communication disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
communication disorders; specific learning disorder (especially reading and writing); problems
communication skills may be deficient among individuals with global developmental delay or
communication, social participation, or academic or occupational performance,
compared with the general population. Schizotypal or paranoid personality disorder may
compulsive disorder; posttraumatic stress disorder; and traumatic brain injury.
condition or its treatment; delirium or major neurocognitive disorder; substance/medication-
condition, neurodevelopmental disorder, or environmental factor, record stereotypic movement
conditions can be associated with manic-like phenomena. This fact is recognized in the
conditions can manifest with psychotic symptoms that must be considered in the differential
conditions. Weight gain, diabetes, metabolic syndrome, and cardiovascular and pulmonary
confirmed by both clinical assessment and individualized, standardized
consonants).
contexts, as manifested by all of the following, currently or by history (examples
coordination disorder, autism spectrum disorder) or other mental disorders (e.g., anxiety and
criteria for a disorder involving short-duration hypomania are provided in Section III in the hope
criteria must be met:
current severity (see
current severity:
daily functioning, such as school or work, interpersonal relationships, and self-care. Individuals
deadlines).
deeper meanings of what is read).
defiance, hostility, or failure to understand tasks or instructions. For older
deficit/hyperactivity disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician
deficit/hyperactivity disorder or for a specific neurodevelopmental disorder, and
deficit/hyperactivity disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
deficit/hyperactivity disorder, autism spectrum disorder, and developmental coordination
deficit/hyperactivity disorder, autism spectrum disorder, intellectual developmental
deficits. An individual with autism spectrum disorder or communication disorder must have
delusional theme (e.g., the sensation of being infested with insects associated
delusions and by the severity of the mood symptoms. If delusions occur exclusively during mood
delusions). The other medical condition should be coded and listed separately
depressive disorder or affective psychosis described in the nineteenth century, differing from that
depressive disorders) or behavioral problems. Notably, estimates of the comorbidity of math and
depressive episode is a requirement. However, the vast majority of individuals whose symptoms
described in Criterion A, specific learning disorder should not be diagnosed.
despite the provision of interventions that target those difficulties:
details, work is inaccurate).
determine their clinical utility; thus, the assessments available in Section III should serve as a
development and of nonverbal intellectual capacity must be relevant for the cultural and
development. However, autism spectrum disorder is often accompanied by behaviors not present
developmental coordination disorder and autism spectrum disorder is common. If criteria for
developmental coordination disorder but may make testing more difficult and may independently
developmental coordination disorder. If criteria for both ADHD and developmental coordination
developmental domains, communication disorders have high rates of comorbidity with other
diagnoses can be given.
diagnoses of substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder and bipolar and related
diagnosis of childhood-onset fluency disorder may be appropriate.
diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder. These include psychotic disorder due to another medical
differential diagnosis more difficult, because each of the co-occurring disorders independently
difficulties associated with schizophrenia or other psychotic disorders, because with these
difficulty remaining focused during lectures, conversations, or lengthy
disability)
disability]), mental disorders (e.g., anxiety disorders), and some medical conditions (e.g., seizure
discussed in detail in the DSM-5 chapter “Personality Disorders.”
disease are more common in schizophrenia than in the general population. Poor engagement in
disease, but other disorder factors, including medications, lifestyle, cigarette smoking, and diet,
disorder (ADHD), specific learning disorder, intellectual developmental disorder [intellectual
disorder (e.g., a history of recurrent non-substance/medication-related
disorder (intellectual disability), language disorder or specific learning disorder, seizure
disorder (stuttering), social (pragmatic) communication disorder, and unspecified communication
disorder and because the instability of mood experienced by individuals with bipolar II disorder
disorder and similar to those in children with bipolar I or II disorder.
disorder are met, both diagnoses can be given.
disorder associated with (name of condition, disorder, or factor) (e.g., stereotypic movement
disorder associated with Lesch-Nyhan syndrome).
disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses
disorder could include the following:
disorder due to another medical condition.
disorder is unclear, the substantial comorbidity between the two may reflect similarities in
disorder, and the impact of early childhood adversity on the development of both bipolar I and
disorder, and unspecified bipolar and related disorder.
disorder, cyclothymic disorder, substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder,
disorder, such as body dysmorphic disorder or obsessive-compulsive disorder.
disorder, which has a duration of less than 1 month.
disorder, with binge-eating disorder being more common than bulimia nervosa and anorexia
disorder. It is also associated with social (pragmatic) communication disorder. In clinical
disorder. Sociocultural factors influence the pattern of comorbid conditions in bipolar disorder.
disorder], obsessive-compulsive disorder).
disorders Sex differences in the development of early communication may give rise to higher
disorders and may be specified with them, but they are not a DSM-5 diagnosis.
disorders there is a decline (often rapid) in these functional domains. However, deficits in
disorders, alcohol use disorder, other substance use disorder, and attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorders, especially substance use disorders and anxiety disorders. Similarly, the incidence of
disorders, including epilepsy (e.g., acquired aphasia or Landau-Kleffner syndrome).
disorders, social anxiety disorder, speech sound disorder, and other developmental disorders.
disorders, specific chromosome abnormalities).
distinctions between the various schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders.
distinguishable from the repetitive sounds of childhood-onset fluency disorder by their nature
disturbance is characterized by frequent repetitions or prolongations of sounds or syllables and
do not warrant a separate diagnosis. If psychotic symptoms persist for at least 1 day, an
do; gets lost in the midst of arithmetic computation and may switch
during a 1-month period (or less if successfully treated). At least one of these
during the course of their lives.
during the developmental period that includes both intellectual and adaptive
dysfluency associated with neurological insult (e.g., stroke, tumor, trauma), or
elsewhere, even in the absence of any obvious distraction).
encephalitis).
episodes have occurred concurrently with the active-phase symptoms, or 2) if
episodes, the diagnosis is major depressive or bipolar disorder, with psychotic features. Mood
evidence of an independent non-substance/medication-induced psychotic
evidence suggesting the existence of an independent non-
evident in most children presenting with autism spectrum disorder and should signal the need for
explain or describe a topic or series of events or have a conversation).
extent of the disturbance varies from situation to situation and often is more severe when there is
features have been ruled out because either 1) no major depressive or manic
features listed in Criterion A. Catatonia is typically diagnosed in an inpatient setting and occurs
features of communication disorders and the relationship of communication to other
features). The other medical condition should also be coded and listed separately
features, bipolar disorder with psychotic features, or other specified or
features; schizoaffective disorder; other specified or unspecified bipolar and related disorder;
feigned for an understandable goal.
fingers to add single-digit numbers instead of recalling the math fact as peers
for an episode of mania, hypomania, or major depression.
for at least 1 month, in order to be diagnosed with schizophrenia as a comorbid condition.
form sentences based on the rules of grammar and morphology).
formal neuropsychological assessment is not conducted, the clinician should use the best
from delusional disorder by the temporal relationship between the mood disturbance and the
functional (conversion) movements. Sudden onset, distractibility, changing pattern with
functioning deficits in conceptual, social, and practical domains. The following three
functioning in one or more major areas, such as work, interpersonal relations, or
general cognitive impairments associated with schizophrenia. If criteria for both disorders are
hand shaking or waving, body rocking, head banging, self-biting, hitting own
have a lower prevalence of substance use comorbidity. Bipolar I disorder is frequently associated
having a history of three or more disorders. The most frequently comorbid disorders are anxiety
health maintenance behaviors (e.g., cancer screening, exercise) increases the risk of chronic
history, and genetics. The diagnoses included in this chapter are bipolar I disorder, bipolar II
hospitalization to prevent harm to self or others, or there are psychotic features.
hyperactivity disorder, motor coordination problems, tics/Tourette’s disorder, and anxiety.
hypermobility syndrome. Different clusters of co-occurrence may be present (e.g., a cluster with
hyperthyroidism).
hypomanic episode and numerous periods with depressive symptoms that do
ideas, or attitudes of another individual. Assessments of speech, language, and communication
identify functional stereotypies.
illness, but not both motor and vocal.
immediately before the bipolar and related disorder due to the medical condition
immediately before the psychotic disorder due to the medical condition (e.g., C34.90
impaired movement control and motor planning). Presence of other disorders does not exclude
in duration of illness, the discussion of the differential diagnosis of schizophrenia also applies to
in language disorder, such as lack of social interest or unusual social interactions (e.g., pulling
in the neurodevelopmental disorders diagnostic class. The unspecified attention-
in up to 35% of individuals with schizophrenia, but the majority of catatonia cases involve
inappropriate for the individual’s age and language skills, persist over time, and
include epilepsy and constipation.
includes any verbal or nonverbal
includes presentations in which there is insufficient information to make a more
includes the following: language disorder, speech sound disorder, childhood-onset fluency
includes the form, function, and use of a conventional system of
incorrectly or slowly and hesitantly, frequently guesses words, has difficulty
independent living, across multiple environments, such as home, school, work,
individually or in any combination.
individuals by the hand without any attempt to look at them), odd play patterns (e.g., carrying
individuals growing up in bilingual environments. The standardized measures of language
individuals with depressive or bipolar disorders. Meta-analysis of clinical samples indicated that
individuals with schizophrenia have tobacco use disorder and smoke cigarettes regularly.
induced psychotic disorder or delirium; major depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic
insufficient information to make a more specific diagnosis.
intellectual developmental disorder
intellectual developmental disorder may not be made until the child is able to complete
intellectual developmental disorder, but a separate diagnosis is not given unless the social
intellectual disability
intelligence testing.
interaction with repetitive and restricted behaviors and other cognitive and communication
interfere with the execution of activities of daily living, thus requiring examiner judgment in
interferes with the execution of activities of daily living, including learning. Thus, clinical
interpersonal, academic, or occupational functioning).
intoxication or substance withdrawal only when the symptoms in Criterion A
intoxication or withdrawal or after exposure to or withdrawal from a
involves apparently psychotic symptoms, there is usually evidence that the illness is being
irritable), represent a noticeable change from usual behavior, and have been
is either schizophreniform disorder, delusional disorder, depressive disorder with psychotic
is often accompanied by serious impairment in work and social functioning.
is placed in
is that another person is in love with the individual.
is used to clarify its relationship
judgment is required to attribute such impairment to learning difficulties. If there is an indication
knock things over. Careful observation across different contexts is required to ascertain if lack of
lability may be more severe.
learning and use. Difficulties are manifested as clumsiness (e.g., dropping or
least 4 consecutive days and present most of the day, nearly every day.
least 6 months to a degree that is inconsistent with developmental level and
least one of the following symptoms that have persisted for at least 6 months,
lengthy papers).
linguistic group (i.e., tests developed and standardized for one group may not provide
made without using this severity specifier.
major depressive episode:
major depressive or bipolar disorder with catatonic features; schizophrenia; delusional disorder;
malignant lung neoplasm; F06.2 psychotic disorder due to malignant lung neoplasm,
manic features).
manic or hypomanic picture may appear during the initial presentation of the medical condition
manifested by all of the following:
markedly impaired, and behavior is not obviously bizarre or odd.
may also play a role. A shared vulnerability for psychosis and medical conditions may explain
may interfere with academic or occupational achievement and with social communication. The
may precipitate brief periods of psychotic symptoms. These symptoms are usually transient and
medical condition.
medical conditions due to infectious, metabolic, or neurological conditions (see “Catatonic
medical conditions, including metabolic syndrome, is increased above base rate for the general
medication (see the chapter “Medication-Induced Movement Disorders and Other Adverse
medication.
meet the criteria for a fully syndromal manic episode also experience major depressive episodes
meet the full criteria for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder or any of the disorders
meet the full criteria for communication disorder or for any of the disorders in the
mental disorder (e.g., F06.2 psychotic disorder due to malignant lung neoplasm, with
mental disorder (e.g., F06.33 bipolar disorder due to hyperthyroidism, with manic
messy, disorganized work; has poor time management; fails to meet
met, both diagnoses can be given.
migraine, and autoimmune disorders.
misunderstanding of unfamiliar metaphors as delusions.
month in response to successful treatment with medication. Careful attention should be given to
mood and abnormally and persistently increased activity or energy, lasting at
mood and abnormally increased activity or energy predominating in the clinical picture
mood episodes have occurred during active-phase symptoms, they have been
motor competence is attributable to distractibility and impulsiveness rather than to
movements).
must be (1), (2), or (3):
necessarily exclude the diagnosis of specific learning disorder but may make testing and
necessary to exclude the presence of epilepsy (e.g., routine and sleep electroencephalogram).
neurocognitive disorder may present with psychotic symptoms,
neurodevelopmental disorder, and includes presentations in which there is
neurodevelopmental disorders (e.g., autism spectrum disorder, attention-deficit/hyperactivity
neurodevelopmental disorders diagnostic class. The unspecified communication
neurodevelopmental or mental disorder (e.g., trichotillomania [hair-pulling
neurodevelopmental, psychotic, bipolar, depressive, or other mental disorders, a wide variety of
neurological symptom disorder (conversion disorder) are some of the typical features that help
normal fluency and time patterning of speech that is inappropriate for the individual’s age. This
not applicable if there is
not meet criteria for a major depressive episode.
not predominate in the clinical picture.
numerous periods with hypomanic symptoms that do not meet criteria for a
objects) as well as slowness and inaccuracy of performance of motor skills (e.g.,
obsessive-compulsive disorder and panic disorder are elevated in individuals with schizophrenia
occupational, or other important areas of functioning, or necessitates
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
occur frequently in young children, which include whole-word or phrase repetitions (e.g., “I
occurrence); autism spectrum disorder; disruptive and emotional behavior problems; and joint
of both (1) and (2):
of encouraging further study of this presentation of bipolar disorder symptomatology and its
of inattention, including ADHD (the most frequent coexisting condition, with about 50% co-
of language disorder.
on physical examination; often with a complaint of pain) may present with symptoms similar to
only when the psychotic episode is persistent and not attributable to the physiological effects of a
onset dysfluency” rather than a neurodevelopmental disorder. Adult-onset dysfluencies are
onset is in childhood or adolescence, there is failure to achieve expected level of
or production that include the following:
or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder.
other medical conditions need to be ruled out; these conditions include, but are not limited to,
other sensory deficit, or a speech-motor deficit. When language deficits are in excess of those
other specified depressive disorder, unspecified depressive disorder, other specified bipolar and
other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder; schizotypal,
overweight/obesity is a particular concern for individuals with bipolar disorder and is associated
parentheses for continued use. The medical and research literature use both terms,
participating in sports).
participating in tasks requiring complex coordination skills, such as ball sports, which will affect
pencils, books, tools, wallets, keys, paperwork, eyeglasses, mobile
phenomenology (i.e., misdiagnosing the emotional extremes of borderline personality disorder as
picture and is characterized by abnormally elevated, expansive, or irritable mood
poor understanding of numbers, their magnitude, and relationships; counts on
population and leads to decreased life expectancy.
population-based sample of 6-year-old children in the United States suggest comorbidity might
potential to substantially complicate course and prognosis. These include cardiovascular disease,
predominate in the clinical picture and when they are sufficiently severe to warrant
premenstrual syndrome and/or premenstrual dysphoric disorder, bipolar mood symptoms and
presence of a prominent and persistent period of abnormally elevated, expansive, or irritable
present to a significant degree:
present) to 4 (present and severe). (See Clinician-Rated Dimensions of
presenting feature of intellectual developmental disorder. However, the definitive diagnosis of
prevalence rates of communication disorders in boys compared with girls. Given the associated
procedures).
professions, advocacy groups, and the lay public. In the United States, Public Law
prototype to stimulate such research.
psychiatric disorders in children with cyclothymic disorder treated in outpatient psychiatric
psychological signs and symptoms may have the appearance of brief psychotic disorder, but in
psychosis, including delusions, hallucinations, abnormal psychomotor behavior,
psychotic disorder may present with symptoms characteristic of Criterion A for schizophrenia,
punctuation errors within sentences; employs poor paragraph organization;
quickly loses focus and is easily sidetracked).
read aloud may be diagnosed mistakenly as having a reading disorder. Oral reading fluency
reading ability are more severe in specific learning disorder than what would be predicted by the
reading difficulties vary depending on the tests used to define the math difficulty, likely because
recurrent non-substance/medication-related episodes).
reflected in the availability of the other specified bipolar and related disorder category. Specific
related disorder could include the following:
related disorder would apply.
related disorder, or unspecified bipolar and related disorder is appropriate.
relative to the duration of the delusional periods.
remarks. If these difficulties increase in frequency or complexity as the child grows older, a
resonance quality.
response to events that, singly or together, would be markedly stressful to
rule-governed manner for communication.
samples, language disorder may co-occur with speech sound disorder, although data from a large
schizoid, or paranoid personality disorders; autism spectrum disorder; disorders presenting in
schizophrenia) may be responsible for any recurring psychotic episodes.
schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder, delusional disorder, or other specified
schizophreniform disorder is difficult when the psychotic symptoms have remitted before 1
schizophreniform disorder.
schoolwork, at work, or during other activities (e.g., overlooks or misses
schoolwork, chores, or duties in the workplace (e.g., starts tasks but
self-care, is markedly below the level achieved prior to the onset (or when the
sensory deficit or a speech-motor deficit. When the speech dysfluencies are in excess of those
sequential tasks; difficulty keeping materials and belongings in order;
settings are greater than those in children with disruptive behavior/attention-deficit/hyperactivity
severe condition than bipolar I disorder, largely because of the burden of depression in bipolar II
severe reading disorders, fine motor problems, and handwriting problems; another cluster with
severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (not
sharing of interests, emotions, or affect; to failure to initiate or respond to
should be paid to the possibility that the catatonia is attributable to G21.0 neuroleptic malignant
since first tic onset.
sleep) may be present in individuals with cyclothymic disorder. Rates of comorbid
social approach and failure of normal back-and-forth conversation; to reduced
social communication; in social anxiety disorder, the social communication skills developed
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not
sociocultural standards for personal independence and social responsibility.
some of the medical comorbidity of schizophrenia.
some time during the illness, although not necessarily concurrently.
sometimes precede the onset of schizophrenia.
sounding out words).
special pressure to communicate (e.g., giving a report at school, interviewing for a job).
specific diagnosis.
specific learning disorder (literacy and numeracy), intellectual developmental disorder, attention-
specific learning disorder with impairment in mathematics and with impairment in reading) and
specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder accompanied by
spectrum and other psychotic disorders and depressive disorders in DSM-5-TR in recognition of
speech; incoherence or irrational content) should be classified in the category other specified or
standardized assessments. Language disorder can occur with varying degrees of intellectual
stress disorder compared to individuals with bipolar I disorder.
substance or another medical condition. Individuals with a delirium or major or minor
substance or neurological condition and is not better explained by another
substance-induced psychotic symptoms (e.g., disorganized or catatonic behavior; disorganized
substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder (e.g., a history of
substance/medication-induced. Such evidence of an independent bipolar or
substance/medication-induced. Such evidence of an independent psychotic
substitutions to avoid problematic words), words produced with an excess of physical tension,
such cases there is evidence that the symptoms are intentionally produced. When malingering
sustained mental effort (e.g., schoolwork or homework; for older
symbols (i.e., spoken words, sign language, written words, pictures) in a
symptoms have been present for at least half the time and the individual has not
symptoms in the presentation. The differential diagnosis between brief psychotic disorder and
symptoms persist for a substantial period of time (e.g., about 1 month) after
symptoms that do not meet the criteria for bipolar I, bipolar II, or cyclothymic disorder is
symptoms that meet full criteria for a mood episode can be superimposed on delusional disorder.
symptoms that meet full criteria for schizophrenia, with prominent hallucinations or delusions
symptoms. In social (pragmatic) communication disorder, the individual has never had effective
syndrome. Language loss may be a symptom of seizures, and a diagnostic assessment is
test performance and function but not reflect core motor competence. Co-occurrence of
that another diagnosis could account for the difficulties learning keystone academic skills
that expected given the individual’s chronological age and opportunity for skill
that might worsen or relapse and herald the appearance of the manic or hypomanic picture.
that negatively impacts directly on social and academic/occupational
that the disturbance is the direct pathophysiological consequence of another
that, singly or together, would be markedly stressful to almost anyone in similar
the cessation of acute withdrawal or severe intoxication; or there is other
the diagnosis must be made without waiting for recovery, it should be qualified
the expressive production of sounds and includes an individual’s articulation, fluency, voice, and
the following criteria for a current or past
the possibility that a recurrent disorder (e.g., bipolar disorder, recurrent acute exacerbations of
the reason that the criteria are not met for communication disorder or for a specific
the same symptom (e.g., arithmetic problems) can be associated with different cognitive deficits
their concurrence may require collateral information from medical records and from informants.
their place as a bridge between those two diagnostic classes in terms of symptomatology, family
those disorders.
those of developmental coordination disorder.
those of social anxiety disorder. The differentiating feature is the timing of the onset of
to specify the reason that the criteria are not met for attention-
to “intellectual disability.”
toys around but never playing with them), unusual communication patterns (e.g., knowing the
typically is measured by timed assessments. Slower reading rates may not accurately reflect the
underlying nature of the relationship between bipolar I disorder and borderline personality
unexplained improvement or aggravation, and the coexistence of other symptoms of functional
unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder, depending on the other
unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder.
untreated medical conditions, which largely explain the shortened life expectancy of those with
using a cultural formulation interview (see Section III, “Culture and Psychiatric Diagnosis”).
usually associated with these problems, a diagnosis of childhood-onset fluency disorder may be
usually associated with these problems, a diagnosis of language disorder may be made.
vocalization.
want, I want ice cream”), incomplete phrases, interjections, unfilled pauses, and parenthetical
when an individual is being assessed for language impairment.
which the individual is preoccupied and concerned with the expressed delusion).
while intellectual disability is the term in common use by educational and other
who recover from schizophreniform disorder have better functional outcomes.
with borderline, schizotypal, and antisocial personality disorder. In particular, although the
with delusions of infestation).
with delusions).
with eventual full return to premorbid level of functioning.
with functioning or development, as characterized by (1) and/or (2):
with other neurodevelopmental disorders (e.g., ADHD, communication disorders, developmental
with poor treatment outcomes.
with psychotic features or another psychotic disorder such as schizophrenia or
with the WHO ICD-11 classification system, which uses the term
written expression of ideas lacks clarity).
